# CA-Real-Estate-Market-Analysis

Analyzing Real Estate Market in California for potential investment opportunities

Summary: The price-to-rent ratio (P/R) is a common metric used by investors to help determine if an investment property will be profitable. The "P/R" measures the affordability of renting and buying in a given housing market by calculating the ratio of home prices to annual rental rates.

Equation: "P/R" = Average Property Price / Average Annual Rental Income Example:

If the average price of a home in a market is 100,000 and the average monthly rent is 1,000, what is the "P/R"? Compare this "P/R" to another market's "P/R" with average property worth 150,000 and average rent 1,200 per month.

"P/R" = 100,000 / (12 x 1,000) = 8.83

"P/R" = 150,000 / (12 x 1,200) = 10.41

What profit information does a "P/R" of 8.83 present? To explain the profitability of a "P/R", we will use the 1% rule. The 1% rule is the measurement of the ratio between monthly rent and the purchase price of the property. In the example above, average rent in one market is 1% of the average purchase price (1,000/100,000) and the average rent in the other market is 0.8% of the average purchase price (1,200/150,000).

Typically, any value greater than or equal to 1% is a good indicator of solid cash flow potential (income generated by property is greater than the expenses of the property). The average rent that is at 1% of the average purchase price has the corresponding "P/R" value of 8.83 which suggests that the lower the "P/R" the greater the profit potential from a cash flow perspective.

Goal: The goal of this project is to narrow down the real estate markets in California to the areas with the greatest profit potential. We will be using 2017 price-to-rent ratio data with California zip codes in order to find the areas with the highest positive net cash flow. The California zip codes will help to define market boundaries and to organize market data. When the areas with the highest profit potential are generated, we will further narrow down the search to the area in closest proximity to zip code 94587 (Union City, CA).

Sources: Zillow (https://www.zillow.com/research/data/) California Open Data Portal (https://data.ca.gov/dataset/county-and-zip-code-references/resource/c3527a9a-81c3-48aa-8ba5-022fc8fc753f#{})
